## 9. Conclusion

Robust and effective recommendation algorithms are critical to a
thriving internet economy. Current approaches are fraught with problems,
from dubious metrics of success, to the cold start problem, to the
algorithm’s general ignorance of content. Solutions are beginning to
make their way into common practice through the use of algorithms such
as multi-modal models. This signals a fundamental shift in the
prevalence of semantic recommendation systems and the fields that are
able to take advantage of them.

Our prototype, Deep Bargain Book Store, shows the possibilities of these
algorithms, as well as their current failings. We are able to sidestep
the cold start problem and form recommendations based on the actual
content that is being recommended. Furthermore, we can recommend items
based on an actual user preference as opposed to an item’s general
popularity. However, the algorithm can use only the summary of a book,
rather than the main text, the algorithms are not quite robust enough
for out-of-the-box usage. There are still quite a few problems to solve.
That said, this exciting field is one that should be on your radar. In
the coming years, new work will accelerate these methods into more
general use across multiple sectors.

There is still societal tension regarding the role of semantic
recommendation systems. Important questions about echo chambers, filter
bubbles and algorithmically tailored content still need exploring for us
to fully understand the ramifications of any system we build. It is
particularly important for recommendation systems to be motivated by
these considerations, since they are built to predict human
interactions!

Over the coming years, we will see new datasets being released that will
help fuel more research into recommendation systems. We predict this
will cause a rise in the applicability, stability, and robustness of
mutli-modal models. With these advances will come recommendation systems
that can be used in new ways, without sacrificing their ability to
create meaningful recommendations.
